New file system globbing content (#25788)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/extensions/file-globbing.md

---
title: File globbing in .NET
author: IEvangelist
description: Learn how to use file globbing in .NET to match various files with the same partial names, extensions, or segments.
ms.author: dapine
ms.date: 08/24/2021
---

# File globbing in .NET

> In this article you'll learn how to use file globbing with the [`Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing) NuGet package. A *glob* is a term used to define patterns for matching file and directory names based on wildcards. Globbing is that act of defining one or more glob pattern, and yielding files from either inclusive or exclusive matches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article you'll learn how to use file globbing with the [`Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing) NuGet package. A *glob* is a term used to define patterns for matching file and directory names based on wildcards. Globbing is the act of defining one or more glob patterns, and yielding files from either inclusive or exclusive matches.
```

## Patterns

> To match files in the file system based on user-defined patterns, start by instantiating a <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher> object. A `Matcher` can be instantiated with no parameters, or with a <xref:System.StringComparison?displayProperty=nameWithType> &mdash; which is used internally for comparing patterns to file names. The `Matcher` exposes several additive methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To match files in the file system based on user-defined patterns, start by instantiating a <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher> object. A `Matcher` can be instantiated with no parameters, or with a <xref:System.StringComparison?displayProperty=nameWithType> parameter &mdash; which is used internally for comparing patterns to file names. The `Matcher` exposes the following additive methods:
```

- <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher.AddExclude%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>
- <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher.AddInclude%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>

Both `AddExclude` and `AddInclude` methods can be called any number of times, to add various file name patterns to either exclude or include from results. Once you've instantiated a `Matcher` and added patterns, it's then used to evaluate matches from a starting directory with the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher.Execute%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> method.

> ## Extensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Extension methods
```

> The `Matcher` object has several convenience based extension methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Matcher` object has several extension methods.
```

```csharp
Matcher matcher = new();
matcher.AddIncludePatterns(new[] { "*.txt", "*.asciidoc", "*.md" });

string searchDirectory = "../starting-folder/";

PatternMatchingResult result = matcher.Execute(
    new DirectoryInfoWrapper(
        new DirectoryInfo(searchDirectory)));

// Use result.HasMatches and results.Files.
// The files in the results object are file paths relative to the search directory.
```

The preceding C# code:

- Instantiates a <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher> object.
- Calls <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.MatcherExtensions.AddIncludePatterns(Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher,System.Collections.Generic.IEnumerable{System.String}[])> to add several file name patterns to include.
- Declares and assigns the search directory value.
- Instantiates a <xref:System.IO.DirectoryInfo> from the given `searchDirectory`.
- Instantiates a <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Abstractions.DirectoryInfoWrapper> from the `DirectoryInfo` it wraps.
- Calls `Execute` given the `DirectoryInfoWrapper` instance to yield a <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.PatternMatchingResult> object.

> [!NOTE]

> > The `DirectoryInfoWrapper` type is defined in the `Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Abstractions` namespace, and the `DirectoryInfo` type is defined in the `System.IO` namespace. To avoid unnecessary `using` statements, you can use the provided extension methods.

Reviewer: It's unclear to me what namespace I'm avoiding, and with which extension methods. I wonder if this alert box is really necessary -- would someone really choose an extension method for the purposes of avoiding a using?

Author: I added it because they avoided to `using` statements, which to me is rather compelling. They remove some inner details that are less relevant to the common consumer.

> There is another convenience based extension method that yields an `IEnumerable<string>` representing the matching files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is another extension method that yields an `IEnumerable<string>` representing the matching files:
```

With a `Matcher` instance, you can call the any of the various `Match` overloads to get a pattern matching result. The `Match` methods invert the responsibility on the caller to provide a file or a collection of files in which to evaluate for matches. In other words, the caller is responsible for passing the file to match on.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> When using any of the `Match` overloads, there is no file system I/O involved. All of the file globbing is done in memory with the include and exclude patterns of the `matcher` instance. The parameters of the `Match` overloads do not have to be fully qualified paths. The current directory (<xref:System.IO.Directory.GetCurrentDirectory?displayProperty=nameWithType>) is used when not specified.

To match a single file:

```csharp
Matcher matcher = new();
matcher.AddInclude("**/*.md");

PatternMatchingResult result = matcher.Match("file.md");
```

The preceding C# code:

- Matches any file with the *.md* file extension, at an arbitrary directory depth.

> - If a file named *file.md* exists in a subdirectory from the current directory:

Reviewer: The preceding alert box says there's no file system I/O, but this statement seems to contradict that, as it implies that the file system is queried to find out if file.md exists.

Author: The match overloads do not involve I/O, they query the in memory directory hierarchy.

  - `result.HasMatches` would be `true`.
  - and `result.Files` would have one match.

The additional `Match` overloads work in similar ways.

## Pattern formats

The patterns that are specified in the `AddExclude` and `AddInclude` methods can use the following formats to match multiple files or directories.

- Exact directory or file name
  
  - `some-file.txt`
  - `path/to/file.txt`

- Wildcards `*` in file and directory names that represent zero to many characters not including separator characters.

    | Value          | Description                                                            |
    |----------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
    | `*.txt`        | All files with *.txt* file extension.                                  |

>     | `*.*`          | All files with an extension.                                           |

Reviewer: "with an extension" seems to imply that \* means 1-to-many, rather than 0-to-many as stated above.

Author: How would you re-phrase this?

Reviewer: Disregard -- I was thinking a file name could end in dot with nothing following, but on trying to create one like that I find that it just discards the dot.

    | `scripts/*/*`  | All files in 'scripts/' or one level of subdirectory under 'scripts/'. |
    | `images*/*`    | All files in a folder with name that is or begins with 'images'.       |

- Arbitrary directory depth (`/**/`).

    | Value | Description |
    | --- | --- |
    | `**/*` | All files in any subdirectory. |
    | `dir/**/*` | All files in any subdirectory under 'dir/'. |

- Relative paths.

    To match all files in a directory named "shared" at the sibling level to the base directory given to <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher.Execute(Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Abstractions.DirectoryInfoBase)?displayProperty=nameWithType>, use `../shared/*`.

## Examples

Consider the following example directory, and each file within its corresponding folder.

```Directory
📁 parent
│    file.md
│    README.md
│
└───📁 child
    │    file.MD
    │    index.js
    │    more.md
    │    sample.mtext
    │
    ├───📁 assets
    │        image.png
    │        image.svg
    │
    └───📁 grandchild
             file.md
             style.css
             sub.text
```

> [!TIP]

> > Some file extensions are in uppercase, while others are in lowercase. This is an important consideration, use the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher.%23ctor(System.StringComparison)?displayProperty=nameWithType> constructor for finite string comparison control. By default, <xref:System.StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase?displayProperty=nameWithType> is used.

Reviewer: The first xref link renders as  Matcher.Matcher(StringComparison) which looks strange.

"...finite string comparison..." -- is "finite" the right word here, or could it be omitted?

```suggestion
> Some file extensions are in uppercase, while others are in lowercase. By default, <xref:System.StringComparer.OrdinalIgnoreCase?displayProperty=nameWithType> is used. To specify different string comparison behavior, use the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.FileSystemGlobbing.Matcher.%23ctor(System.StringComparison)?displayProperty=nameWithType> constructor. 
```

> To get all of the markdown files, where the file extension is either the *.md* or *.mtext* (regardless of their file name character casing):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get all of the markdown files, where the file extension is either *.md* or *.mtext*, regardless of character case:
```
